[BLOG] Orange 2 on modern Linux (#286)
biolab/orange-hugo: content/blog/2021/2021-12-28-orange2.md

date = "2021-12-28"
draft = false
title = "Compiling Orange 2 on modern Linux"
type = "blog"
thumbImage = "/blog_img/2021/2021-12-28-orange2-about.png"
frontPageImage = "/blog_img/2021/2021-12-28-orange2-about.png"
blog = ["python", "development", "linux"]
shortExcerpt = "How to compile an ancient version of Orange on Ubuntu 20.04 or how to spend a cold winter evening."
longExcerpt = "How to compile an ancient version of Orange on Ubuntu 20.04 or how to spend a cold winter evening."
x2images = false  # true if using retina screenshots, else false
+++

We abandoned Orange 2 in 2015 because we did not have enough resources to split between maintaining Orange 2 and building the new version from scratch. Orange was due for a rewrite for quite some time. The core of the pre-3 Orange was written mainly in C++. When Orange was conceived, extending Python with C was the only option to make it run fast enough. Orange was designed before NumPy and even before NumPy's predecessors, Numarray and Numeric. The resulting code was hard to maintain. In the meantime, Python libraries such as NumPy and scikit-learn matured, so the rewrite seemed reasonable: Orange 3 was born.

> Currently, we need Orange 2 as a reference implementation for interaction analysis, something that Orange 3 still lacks. Two features positively interact if observing them features in combination yields more information than the sum of information of observing both features separately. The Interaction Graph widget from Orange 2, which uses the [interaction gain measure](http://stat.columbia.edu/~jakulin/Int/), is a great tool to discover such interacting features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, we need Orange 2 as a reference implementation for interaction analysis, something that Orange 3 still lacks. Two features positively interact if observing the features in combination yields more information than the sum of information of observing both features separately. The Interaction Graph widget from Orange 2, which uses the [interaction gain measure](http://stat.columbia.edu/~jakulin/Int/), is a great tool to discover such interacting features.
```

As a Linux user, I admire the backward compatibility we learned to expect on Windows: if an application ever did work there, it probably still does. On Windows, an old Orange 2 build from [the download archive](https://download.biolab.si/download/files/) probably still works. In contrast, old Mac OS Orange packages are likely problematic because recent Mac OS versions stopped supporting 32-bit binaries. 

Linux/GNU users do not have the luxury of installing old binary Orange packages. They do not exist because building them presented a lot of work that would benefit a few users. Even if they had, they would be hard to run; while the Linux kernel is highly backward compatible, its userspace is not. 

Therefore, we need to dig into the code, starting with a checkout of Orange 2 code for the git repository:

```
git clone git@github.com:biolab/orange2.git
cd orange2
```

> The source code includes the INSTALL.txt, which suggests installing a bunch of Python libraries with the Linux distribution's package manager and then compilin[g Orange. Now, the problems start. The instructions say they were tested with Ubuntu 14.04, which is not more than seven years old. Curiously, a quick `git blame` confirms that I was the author of the instructions, so Ubuntu 14.04 seems to be the latest distribution I have ever used to install Orange 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source code includes the INSTALL.txt, which suggests installing a bunch of Python libraries with the Linux distribution's package manager and then compiling Orange. Now, the problems start. The instructions say they were tested with Ubuntu 14.04, which is not more than seven years old. Curiously, a quick `git blame` confirms that I was the author of the instructions, so Ubuntu 14.04 seems to be the latest distribution I have ever used to install Orange 2.
```
